---
layout: post
title: FijiExpress Setup
categories: [userguides, express, 2.0.2]
tags : [express-ug]
version: 2.0.2
order : 2
description: Setup.
---

The setup for Fiji is described in [Getting Started](http://www.fiji.org/getstarted/#Installation).

The following sections go into a little more detail if you don't already have your system up and running.

## Prerequisites

### JDK

Make sure you have the JDK: version 6 or later.

### Build Tools

Maven is a software project build tool that can be easily configured to compile FijiExpress
Scala files into Java JARs. You can put off setting up Maven by running FijiExpress jobs
on the FijiExpress REPL, or by configuring the development environment of your choice to
pull in the appropriate Fiji dependencies.

Setup Maven as described in [Maven Users Center](http://maven.apache.org/users/index.html).
You should be able to create the example project and run it using Java.

To complete the Maven setup for FijiExpress:

* Create a Maven project and add the Fiji repositories to your Maven `pom.xml` file:

           <repositories>
             <repository>
               <id>fiji-repos</id>
               <name>fiji-repos</name>
               <url>https://repo.wibidata.com/artifactory/fiji</url>
             </repository>
           </repositories>

* Update the `pom.xml` file to include the Fiji framework and FijiExpress:

        <dependency>
          <groupId>org.fiji.express</groupId>
          <artifactId>fiji-express</artifactId>
          <version>${express.version}</version>
          <scope>provided</scope>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
          <groupId>org.fiji.framework</groupId>
          <artifactId>fiji-framework</artifactId>
          <version>${fiji.framework.version}</version>
          <scope>provided</scope>
        </dependency>

More detailed instructions on setting up your maven project can be found
[here](http://www.fiji.org/get-started-with-maven).

### Fiji BentoBox

The Fiji package is called "Bento" after the Japanese style of serving boxed meals. Each
new version of the bento is named after food inspired by the bento, in
alphabetical sequence.

Fiji runs on Hadoop and HBase.  If you do not already have a cluster with these
services, the Fiji BentoBox is a useful quickstart cluster on your local
machine that will let you try out the Fiji tools.

[Download the BentoBox](http://www.fiji.org/getstarted/#Downloads), move it to where you want it to
live (typically `/opt`), expand it.  Unzip the archive with the command

    tar xzf <bento-archive-filename>

This will expand the bento in a directory named `fiji-bento-\<version\>/`.

## Run the Bento

    cd <path/to/bento>
    source bin/fiji-env.sh
    bento start

## Install a Fiji Instance

Install Fiji system tables in HBase:

    fiji install --fiji=fiji://.env/project-name


## Create Tables in your Fiji Instance

FijiSchema includes the functionality to create and manipulate Fiji tables. Use the
FijiSchema shell to perform the one-time task of generating tables for your project’s
input and output data. Follow these steps:

1. Create a data definition in the form of a DDL file to specify the schema of the tables
you want to create.

    Basically, you are creating tables with names, descriptions, row key format, and the
    locality group description with the families and columns that make up the table. The
    easiest way to do this is to copy one of the DDL files from a Fiji tutorial project
    and modify it to meet your needs. Find an example here:

        ${FIJI_HOME}/examples/express-music/src/main/resources/org/fiji/express/music/music-schema.ddl

    More detailed information about FijiSchema requirements and the DDL syntax is here:

        http://docs.fiji.org/userguides/schema/1.2.1/schema-shell-ddl-ref/

2. Run the DDL file against the project instance in the FijiSchema shell:

        fiji-schema-shell --fiji=fiji://.env/project-name --file=/path/to/layout.ddl
