---
layout: post
title: What is FijiExpress?
categories: [userguides, express, 2.0.3]
tags : [express-ug]
version: 2.0.3
order : 1
description: Overview.
---

FijiExpress is a set of tools designed to make defining data processing MapReduce jobs quick and
expressive, particularly for data stored in Fiji tables.

FijiExpress jobs are written in the Scala programming language, which gives you access to
Java libraries and tools but is more concise and easier to write. In addition, FijiExpress
gives you access to functionality for building complex MapReduce data pipelines by
including the Scalding library, a Twitter sponsored open-source library for authoring
flows of analytics-focused MapReduce jobs. FijiExpress is integrated with Avro to give
you access to complex records and data types in your data transformation pipelines.

The core functionality of FijiExpress currently provides developers with tools
to manipulate data in pipelines that provide considerable flexibility over
trying to write MapReduce jobs directly in Java.

## Using this Document

The first section of this document describes [how to set up your
environment]({{site.userguide_express_2.0.3}}/setup).

Then there are sections on [data concepts in
Fiji]({{site.userguide_express_2.0.3}}/data-concepts), [a Scala and Scalding
introduction]({{site.userguide_express_2.0.3}}/basic-scala-scalding), and an [example FijiExpress
job]({{site.userguide_express_2.0.3}}/example-job) that demonstrates and explains the Scalding
concepts in action.

If you are already familiar with Scala and Scalding, you can skip directly to the last sections,
which outline functionality specific to FijiExpress.  These are the [FijiExpress
sources]({{site.userguide_express_2.0.3}}/fiji-sources) and [Data flow operations in
FijiExpress]({{site.userguide_express_2.0.3}}/data-flow-ops).  The last section goes over [how to
run FijiExpress jobs]({{site.userguide_express_2.0.3}}/running-jobs).

## Useful External References

* [Scala](http://www.scala-lang.org/documentation/)
* [Introduction to
  Scalding](https://github.com/twitter/scalding/wiki/Getting-Started#wordcount-in-scalding)
* [Scalding Fields-based API
  reference](https://github.com/twitter/scalding/wiki/Fields-based-API-Reference)

## Other Fiji References

* [FijiSchema]({{site.userguide_schema_1_4_2}}/fiji-schema-overview) is used to
  create Fiji tables.
* [The FijiExpress tutorial]({{site.tutorial_express_devel}}/express-overview) is a good
  introduction and demonstration of FijiExpress.
